---
layout: "step"
title: Add Mutations
nav_order: 3
permalink: /tutorial/add-mutations/
---

# Add Mutations

In this tutorial we will be adding Mutations to GraphQL server. Mutations allow the GraphQL clients to make modifications to existing data whether that be to
create something new, update something, or delete something.  We will be adding two mutations to our server which will allow our clients to check in and check
out library assets.

## Update the typeDef

First, we are going to define in our typeDef file the interface on how a client can interact with our mutation. In the checkout.typeDef.js file we will add a
new type Mutation {} entry. In this type we specify the two mutations that we will be adding to our GraphQL server. We’ll add a “checkoutAsset” mutation that
accepts an assetUpc and userEmail as arguments and will return the newly created CheckOut. Our MySQL database is set up to default the value of the checkinDate
column to the current DATETIME if not specified, so we don’t need to include that as an argument. We’ll also add a “checkinAsset” mutation that will accept an
assetUpc argument and return the updated CheckOut.

<pre><code class="language-graphql">
# File: src/schema/checkout/checkout.typeDef.js
extend type Mutation {
  checkoutAsset(assetUpc: String!, userEmail: String!): CheckOut!
  checkinAsset(assetUpc: String!): CheckOut!
}
</code></pre>

## Update the Database

Back in our checkout.model.js file we’ll create the methods used to perform the mutations and persist the data in our database. Create an asynchronous method
called “checkoutAsset” and attach it to the model. This function with have the same signature as a resolver function, so we will pass the root field and query
args as arguments.

Now we can format our query making certain to sanitize any user input and execute our query on the database. Since we defined our checkoutAsset mutation to
return the newly created CheckOut, we’ll need to run another query to fetch that newly created row. Different databases may allow you to perform the insert and
fetch in a single action, but MySQL with our driver does not.  Once we have the newly created CheckOut, we will return that to the GraphQL client.

<pre><code class="language-javascript">
// File: src/schema/checkout/checkout.model.js
import { ApolloError } from 'apollo-server-express';
...
const Checkout = {
  ...
    checkoutAsset: async (root, args) => {
    const assetIsCheckedOut = await isAssetCheckedOut(args.assetUpc);
    if (assetIsCheckedOut) {
      return new ApolloError(errors.assetDuplicateCheckout.message, errors.assetDuplicateCheckout.code);
    }

    const insertQuery = mysqlDataConnector.format('INSERT INTO checkouts (asset_upc, user_email) VALUES (?, ?);', [args.assetUpc, args.userEmail]);
    const insertResults = await mysqlDataConnector.pool.query(insertQuery);
    if (insertResults.affectedRows === 1) {
      const newRowQuery = mysqlDataConnector.format(`SELECT ${mappedQueryFields} FROM checkouts WHERE asset_upc=? AND checkin_date IS NULL`, args.assetUpc);
      const queryResults = await mysqlDataConnector.pool.query(newRowQuery);
      return queryResults[0];
    }

    return new ApolloError(errors.assetCheckoutFailed.message, errors.assetCheckoutFailed.code);
  },
  ...
}
</code></pre>
<br />

Some mutations may require additional checks to be run in order for the mutation to be successful. For example, if a GraphQL client requests that a currently
checked out asset be checked out again, we should give some sort of notification that this must be an error as the same asset cannot be checked out by two
different individuals at the same time.

We can add an additional check while running our checkoutAsset function to query the database and verify that the asset is not currently checked out. If we find
that it is, we can return an instance of the ApolloError class provided by apollo-server-express to inform the client of the issue.

To help keep our code clean, lets create a new file to store constants such as error messages. We’ll call that file “checkout.constants.js” and we can start by
moving some existing constants (such as checkoutTableVariableMap) currently defined in the model file to this new constants file. We’ll create and
export a new constant called “errors” which will hold the error messages and error codes that we will send to our client using the ApolloError class.

<pre><code class="language-javascript">
// File: src/schema/checkout/checkout.constants.js
export const checkoutTableVariablesMap = {
  id: 'row_id',
  userEmail: 'user_email',
  assetUpc: 'asset_upc',
  checkoutDate: 'checkout_date',
  checkinDate: 'checkin_date',
};

export const mappedQueryFields = Object.keys(checkoutTableVariablesMap)
  .map(key => `${checkoutTableVariablesMap[key]} as ${key}`)
  .join(', ');

export const errors = {
  assetDuplicateCheckout: {
    code: 'ASSET_DUPLICATE_CHECKOUT_ATTEMPTED',
    message: 'This asset appears to already be checked out, please check it back in first',
  },

  assetNoCheckout: {
    code: 'ASSET_NO_CHECKOUT_FOUND',
    message: 'This asset does not appear be checked out',
  },

  assetCheckoutFailed: {
    code: 'ASSET_CHECKOUT_FAILURE',
    message: 'There was an error checking out the asset',
  },
};
</code></pre>
<br />

Back in checkout.model.js file we will import our newly exported constants and update our checkoutAsset function. We’ll first add a helper function called
“isAssetCheckedOut” which gets the current checkout status of the requested asset. If the isAssetCheckedOut method resolves to true.

<pre><code class="language-javascript">
import { checkoutTableVariablesMap, errors, mappedQueryFields } from './checkout.constants';
...
async function isAssetCheckedOut(assetUpc) {
  const isCheckedOutQuery = mysqlDataConnector.format('SELECT count(*) AS row_count FROM checkouts WHERE asset_upc=? and checkin_date IS NULL', assetUpc);
  const isCheckedOutResults = await mysqlDataConnector.pool.query(isCheckedOutQuery);
  return isCheckedOutResults[0].row_count > 0;
}
</code></pre>
<br />

Our <code class="language-javascript">checkoutAsset()</code> function can now be updated to run this validation and return a new <code
class="language-javascript">ApolloError</code> with an appropriate message and error code. Only the error message is required when constructing a new <code
class="language-javascript">ApolloError</code>, but error codes can be quite useful to the client for many reasons of which one is to allow for easier
internationalization of the client UI. In addition to the message and code <code class="language-javascript">ApolloError</code> takes a third “properties”
argument to allow for additional information to be added to the error object in the response payload sent to the client.

<pre><code class="language-javascript">
// File: src/schema/checkout/checkout.model.js
export async function checkoutAsset(root, args) {
  // Before performing some mutations, we may want to perform an additional check to make certain that the mutation is a valid request.
  const assetIsCheckedOut = await isAssetCheckedOut(args.assetUpc);
  if (assetIsCheckedOut) {
    return new ApolloError(errors.assetDuplicateCheckout.message, errors.assetDuplicateCheckout.code);
  }
  ...
}
</code></pre>

## Update the Resolver

Once our checkoutAsset function is created and exported we will need to update the resolver file to specify how the checkoutAsset mutation should be handled. In
the checkout.resolver.js file we will import the newly created checkoutAsset function and add a new “Mutation” object to our default export. The mutation object
will include properties for each Mutation defined in our typeDef. The key to the mutation must match that of what was defined in the typeDef. 

<pre><code class="language-javascript">
// File: src/schema/checkout/checkout.resolver.js
import CheckOut from './checkout.model';
export default {
  Query: {
    ...
  },

  Mutation: {
    checkoutAsset: CheckOut.checkoutAsset,
    checkinAsset: CheckOut.checkinAsset,
  },

  CheckOut: {
    ...
  },
};
</code></pre>
<br />

For our checkinAsset handler we do much the same as our checkoutAsset handler with the differences being that our check will verify that the asset is currently
checked out and our database query will be to update an existing row rather than inserting a new one. For our MySQL update, we will run three queries.
  1. Verify asset is checked out and return the `row_id` if it is
  2. Update the database table setting the `checkin_date` for the found `row_id`
  3. Query the database table to get all information for the updated asset and return it to the client

<pre><code class="language-javascript">
// File: src/schema/checkout/checkout.model.js
const CheckOut = {
  ...
  checkinAsset: async (root, args) => {
    const findCheckoutQuery = mysqlDataConnector.format('SELECT row_id FROM checkouts WHERE asset_upc=? and checkin_date IS NULL', args.assetUpc);
    const checkouts = await mysqlDataConnector.pool.query(findCheckoutQuery);
    if (checkouts.length === 0) {
      return new ApolloError(errors.assetNoCheckout.message, errors.assetNoCheckout.code);
    }
    const checkInQuery = mysqlDataConnector.format('UPDATE checkouts SET checkin_date = NOW() WHERE row_id=?', checkouts[0].row_id);
    await mysqlDataConnector.pool.query(checkInQuery);
    const verifyQuery = mysqlDataConnector.format(`SELECT ${mappedQueryFields} FROM checkouts WHERE row_id=?`, checkouts[0].row_id);
    const results = await mysqlDataConnector.pool.query(verifyQuery);
    return results[0];
  },
  ...
}
</code></pre>
<br />

## Validate updates

After a server restart we can head to http://localhost:4000/graphql again to verify our work. First we issue the following mutation to checkout a new asset.

<pre><code class="language-graphql">
mutation {
  checkoutAsset(assetUpc: "9000000028", userEmail: "crosewell4@freewebs.com") {
    assetUpc
    userEmail
    checkoutDate
    checkinDate
  }
}
</code></pre>

Our response should be our newly created CheckOut. Running the exact same query again should give us an error since we have yet to check this asset back in.

To check the asset back in we will update our mutation like so

<pre><code class="language-graphql">
mutation {
  checkinAsset(assetUpc: "9000000028") {
    assetUpc
    userEmail
    checkoutDate
    checkinDate
  }
}
</code></pre>

We should now see the updated CheckOut as the response with the checkinDate properly set.  Once again, if we run that exact same query we will receive an error
stating that the asset is not currently checked out and so cannot be checked in.
