---
layout: "step"
title: Directives
nav_order: 8
permalink: /tutorial/directives/
---

# Custom Directives

In this tutorial, we will be implementing custom schema directives for our GraphQL server. A directive is used any time we want to perform an operation on
various parts of a GraphQL document. They can be applied to multiple locations in the schema and used to modify data, apply restrictions & validations to data
and more.

The GraphQL spec has three directives built in: `@skip`, `@include` and `@deprecated`. The first two are query directives and are applied to the `FIELD`,
`FRAGMENT_SPREAD` and `INLINE_FRAGMENT` schema locations. They are used by the client to specify if certain fields should appear in the query results. The
`@deprecated` directive is a schema directive and applied to the `FIELD_DEFINITION` and `ENUM_VALUE` locations in the server type definitions. Information on
how to use the build in directive can be found in [section 3.13 of the the GraphQL spec document](https://facebook.github.io/graphql/June2018/#sec--skip).

For this tutorial, we will be focusing on implementing schema directives. While the GraphQL spec specifies how directives should behave, implementing them can
happen in a variety of different ways. To simplify our implementation, we'll be using a utility class from
[graphql-tools](https://github.com/apollographql/graphql-tools) to define and apply our custom directives to our schema. The graphql-tools [made a deliberate
decision](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphql-tools/schema-directives.html#What-about-query-directives) to currently only support adding schema
directives and not query directives. For all of our purposes, this is an acceptable trade-off and does enforce more consistent directive usage in our GraphQL
environment.

Our current api includes some date fields that we always return in ISO format and UTC timezone. Let's write a directive that will allow our users to specify the
format, timezone and locale to allow them to receive our date in whatever format they wish. In our schema folder, we'll create a new directives folder and
define all of our schema directives here. Inside that folder, we'll create a file for our date directive called "date.js".

## Create the directive

### Install directive dependencies

We'll be using [Luxon](https://moment.github.io/luxon/index.html) and [full-icu](https://github.com/unicode-org/full-icu-npm) for date formatting with full
internationalization support. Along with installing these dependencies, we must also tell the node binary where to find the icu data.

<pre><code class="language-shell">
npm install --save luxon full-icu
</code></pre><br />

<pre><code class="language-json">
{
  ...
  "scripts": {
    ...
    "start": "node <mark>--icu-data-dir=./node_modules/full-icu</mark> dist/index.js",
    "watch": "nodemon <mark>--icu-data-dir=./node_modules/full-icu</mark> -r @babel/register -w src -e js src/index.js",
    "debug": "nodemon <mark>--icu-data-dir=./node_modules/full-icu</mark> -r @babel/register --inspect=127.0.0.1:9228 -w src -e js ./src/index.js",
    ...
  }
  ...
}
</code></pre><br />

### Define the directive

In order to create a directive, we must define two things. First we'll need to define and export the type definition for the directive. Our directive will take
three arguments with two of those arguments having the specified default values. The <code class="language-graphql">on FIELD_DEFINITION</code> part specifies
that our new directive can be applied where we define fields elsewhere in our other type definitions. A full list of possible locations can be found in the
[GraphQL language spec](https://facebook.github.io/graphql/June2018/#sec-Type-System.Directives) though some locations (such as FIELD) do not apply to schema
directives.

<pre><code class="language-graphql">
// File: src/schema/directives/date.js
export const typeDef = /* GraphQL */`
  directive @date(
    format: String
    timezone: String = "utc"
    locale: String = "en"
  ) on FIELD_DEFINITION
`;
</code></pre><br />

The second thing we need to define is how our directive is going to be handled. For that, we'll be extending and exporting the `SchemeDirectiveVisitor` class
from graphql-tools. During server startup when our schema definitions are being evaluated each item in the schema is evaluated and an AST is generated. The
SchemaDirectiveVisitor class defines modifications that we can make on the AST as each node is visited. There are various different nodes that we can operate on
with this visitor class. The full list can be found in the [graphql-tools
docs](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphql-tools/schema-directives.html#Implementing-schema-directives). Since our new directive is applied to the <code
class="language-graphql">FIELD_DEFINITION</code> location, we will override the <code class="language-javascript">visitFieldDefinition()</code> method of the
visitor class and define how our directive should be handled there.

<pre><code class="language-javascript">
// File: src/schema/directives/date.js
import { SchemaDirectiveVisitor } from 'graphql-tools';
import { defaultFieldResolver, GraphQLString } from 'graphql';
import { DateTime } from 'luxon';

class DateDirective extends SchemaDirectiveVisitor {
  visitFieldDefinition(field) {

    // Get the field's resolve function defined if one exists, use the default resolver if one had not been defined
    const { resolve = defaultFieldResolver } = field;

    // Get the default values for arguments that we defined type definition
    const {
      timezone: defaultTimezone,
      locale: defaultLocale,
    } = this.args;

    // Add a name, type and description to the AST for each of the arguments specified in our type definition
    field.args.push({
      name: 'format',
      type: GraphQLString,
      description: 'format string based on tokens defined in https://moment.github.io/luxon/docs/manual/formatting.html#table-of-tokens',
    });
    field.args.push({
      name: 'timezone',
      type: GraphQLString,
      description: 'IANA timezone string (ie America/New_York). Full list: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_tz_database_time_zones',
    });
    field.args.push({
      name: 'locale',
      type: GraphQLString,
      description: 'HTML language code for localized date formats. https://www.w3schools.com/tags/ref_language_codes.asp',
    });

    // Define extra operations to perform when resolving a field value
    field.resolve = async (source, { format, timezone, locale, ...otherArgs }, context, info) => {
      const date = await resolve(source, otherArgs, context, info);
      const jsDate = new Date(date);
      if (!date || Number.isNaN(jsDate.getTime())) {
        return null;
      }

      const luxonDate = DateTime.fromJSDate(jsDate)
        .setLocale(locale || defaultLocale)
        .setZone(timezone || defaultTimezone);

      return format ? luxonDate.toFormat(format) : luxonDate.toISO();
    };
  }
}

// Export the Directive in an object keyed to the name of the directive.
export const dateDirectives = {
  date: DateDirective,
};
</code></pre><br />

Now that our directive is completely defined, we'll need to apply it to the schema. For convenience, we'll create a new index.js file in our directives
directory and re-export all definitions in the form needed when creating the schema.

<pre><code class="language-javascript">
// File: src/schema/directives/index.js
import { typeDef as dateTypeDef, dateDirectives } from './date';

export const directiveTypeDefs = [
  dateTypeDef,
];

export const schemaDirectives = {
  ...dateDirectives,
};
</code></pre><br />

Lastly, we'll apply our new directives to the schema.

<pre><code class="language-javascript">
// File: src/schema/index.js
...
<mark>import { directiveTypeDefs, schemaDirectives } from './directives';</mark>

...

const typeDefs = [
  baseTypeDef,
  checkoutTypeDef,
  patronTypeDef,
  bookTypeDef,
  <mark>...directiveTypeDefs,</mark>
];

...

const schema = makeExecutableSchema({
  typeDefs,
  resolvers,
  <mark>schemaDirectives,</mark>
});

...
</code></pre><br />

## Apply the Directive

To use our new directive, we will need to update the appropriate type definitions. Our CheckOut type includes two data fields that we are currently manually formatting in custom resolvers. This can all now be replaced with our new <code class="language-graphql">@date</code> directive.

To apply the directive, we simply append the directive to the field definition for the type.

<pre><code class="language-graphql">
// File: src/schema/checkout/checkout.typeDef.js
type CheckOut {
  id: ID!
  userEmail: String!
  assetUpc: String!
  checkoutDate: String! <mark>@date</mark>
  checkinDate: String <mark>@date</mark>
  patron: Patron!
  book: Book!
}
</code></pre><br />

We can also delete the old custom resolvers that we had been using to format the dates since all of that formatting will now occur with our directive.

<pre><code class="language-javascript">
// File: src/schema/checkout/checkout.resolvers.js
CheckOut: {
  // checkinDate: (checkout) => {
  //   if (checkout.checkinDate) {
  //     let { checkinDate } = checkout;
  //     if (typeof checkinDate === 'string') {
  //       checkinDate = new Date(checkout.checkinDate);
  //     }
  //     return checkinDate.toISOString();
  //   }
  //   return null;
  // },
  // checkoutDate: (checkout) => {
  //   let { checkoutDate } = checkout;
  //   if (typeof checkoutDate === 'string') {
  //     checkoutDate = new Date(checkout.checkoutDate);
  //   }
  //   return checkoutDate.toISOString();
  // },
},
</code></pre><br />

## Verify the Directive

Now, back in the GraphQL Playground we'll refresh our schema and test our new directive. First, let's make sure everything is still working as before if no
directive arguments are specified. With the following query, we should still see our originally formatted UTC ISO date strings.

<pre><code class="language-graphql">
{
  checkouts( next: 1 ) {
    id
    assetUpc
    checkoutDate
    checkinDate
  }
}

==> results
{
  "data": {
    "checkouts": [
      {
        "id": "316",
        "assetUpc": "9000000028",
        "checkoutDate": "2000-01-31T10:27:00.000Z",
        "checkinDate": "2000-02-15T16:21:34.000Z"
      }
    ]
  }
}
</code></pre><br />

Great, but lets say we want our current user of the system lives in Paris and only needs the date of the date without the time. To use our new directive, we can
simply pass the directive arguments to any field where the directive was applied in the schema.

<pre><code class="language-graphql">
{
  checkouts( next: 1 ) {
    id
    assetUpc
    checkoutDate (format: "DDD", locale: "fr", timezone: "Europe/Paris")
    checkinDate (format: "DDD", locale: "fr", timezone: "Europe/Paris")
  }
}

==> results
{
  "data": {
    "checkouts": [
      {
        "id": "316",
        "assetUpc": "9000000028",
        "checkoutDate": "31 janvier 2000",
        "checkinDate": "15 février 2000"
      }
    ]
  }
}
</code></pre><br />

## Directives for input validation

Another very common use case for custom directives is input validation. Input validation is very important when we want to make certain that no malicious data
is allowed to enter our persistent data stores. We may also want to clean data or remove any data that may have gotten into our database through some previous
exploit.

Let's create a custom directive that verifies that any email address sent to or received from our API is safe.

First, we'll create a new directive file. Just like our date directive, we'll declare the typeDef this time taking no arguments and applying our directive to
the ARGUMENT_DEFINITION, INPUT_FIELD_DEFINITION, and FIELD_DEFINITION locations.

<pre><code class="language-javascript">
// File: src/schema/directives/email.js
export const typeDef = /* GraphQL */`
  directive @email on ARGUMENT_DEFINITION | INPUT_FIELD_DEFINITION | FIELD_DEFINITION
`;
</code></pre>
<br />

We'll create a new GraphQL type for the email address and override the <code class="language-javascript">parseLiteral()</code> method of the extended
GraphQLScalarType. This method is run each time an input with our <code class="language-javascript">@email</code> directive applied is evaluated. If the value
of the input is a correctly formatted email address, we'll return the parsed value. If not, we throw an ApolloError that the client can read and handle.

<pre><code class="language-javascript">
// File: src/schema/directives/email.js
const emailRegEx = /[a-z0-9!#$%&'*+/=?^_`{|}~-]+(?:\.[a-z0-9!#$%&'*+/=?^_`{|}~-]+)*@(?:[a-z0-9](?:[a-z0-9-]*[a-z0-9])?\.)+[a-z0-9](?:[a-z0-9-]*[a-z0-9])?/;

class EmailType extends GraphQLScalarType {
  constructor(type) {
    super({
      name: 'Email',
      parseValue: value => type.parseValue(value),
      serialize: value => type.serialize(value),
      parseLiteral: (ast) => {
        if (emailRegEx.test(ast.value)) {
          return type.parseLiteral(ast);
        }
        throw new ApolloError('Email address failed validation', 'INVALID_EMAIL');
      },
    });
  }
}
</code></pre>
<br />

Next we need to create the directive and override the appropriate visitor methods of the extended SchemaDirectiveVisitor class. Here we can use a utility method
<code class="language-javascript">wrapType()</code> that will change the type of the field or argument to our newly created EmailType wherever the directive is
applied. For the <code class="language-javascript">visitInputFieldDefinition()</code> and <code class="language-javascript">visitArgumentDefinition()</code>
methods we can simply call this utility method and the <code class="language-javascript">parseLiteral()</code> will handle sending an error to the client if an
invalid email address is passed as an input or argument to a query or mutation.

For the <code class="language-javascript">visitFieldDefinition()</code> we'll want to do something slightly different. For our API, if an invalid email address
had made its way into our database, we still want to return any valid information as well as the error stating that the email address is not present in the
response due to it being invalid. When resolving the email address, we'll either want to return the properly formatted email or an error stating that it was
improperly formatted.

<pre><code class="language-javascript">
// File: src/schema/directives/email.js
import { SchemaDirectiveVisitor } from 'graphql-tools';
import { defaultFieldResolver, GraphQLScalarType, GraphQLNonNull } from 'graphql';
import { ApolloError } from 'apollo-server-express';
...

class EmailDirective extends SchemaDirectiveVisitor {
  visitFieldDefinition(field) {
    this.wrapType(field);
    const { resolve = defaultFieldResolver } = field;
    field.resolve = async (source, args, context, info) => {
      const email = await resolve(source, args, context, info);
      if (emailRegEx.test(email)) {
        return email;
      }
      return new ApolloError('Email address failed validation', 'INVALID_EMAIL');
    };
  }

  visitInputFieldDefinition(field) {
    this.wrapType(field);
  }

  visitArgumentDefinition(argument) {
    this.wrapType(argument);
  }

  wrapType(field) {
    if (field.type instanceof GraphQLNonNull && field.type.ofType instanceof GraphQLScalarType) {
      field.type = new GraphQLNonNull(new EmailType(field.type.ofType));
    } else if (field.type instanceof GraphQLScalarType) {
      field.type = new EmailType(field.type);
    } else {
      throw new Error(`Not a scalar type: ${field.type}`);
    }
  }
}

export const emailDirectives = {
  email: EmailDirective,
};
</code></pre>

Finally, we'll export our next email directive and re-export it with our date directive.

<pre><code class="language-javscript">
// File: src/schema/directives/index.js
import { typeDef as dateTypeDef, dateDirectives } from './date';
<mark>import { typeDef as emailTypeDef, emailDirectives } from './email';</mark>

export const directiveTypeDefs = [
  dateTypeDef,
  <mark>emailTypeDef,</mark>
];

export const schemaDirectives = {
  ...dateDirectives,
  <mark>...emailDirectives,</mark>
};
</code></pre>
<br />

Now we can add our directive to our inputs and verify all is working as expected. Our CheckOut typeDef has two queries and one mutation that accepts an email
address. To apply our directive, we just need to add <code class="language-javscript">@date</code> to the definitions.

<pre><code class="language-graphql">
# File: src/schema/checkout/checkout.typeDef.js
const typeDef = /* GraphQL */`
  extend type Query {
    checkouts(
      userEmail: String <mark>@email</mark>
      assetUpc: String
      cursor: String
      next: Int
    ): [CheckOut]

    checkoutFeed(
      userEmail: String <mark>@email</mark>
      assetUpc: String
      sort: [SortObject!]
      cursor: String
      next: Int
      queryId: ID
    ): Feed
  }

  extend type Mutation {
    checkoutAsset(assetUpc: String!, userEmail: String! <mark>@email</mark>): CheckOut!
    checkinAsset(assetUpc: String!): CheckOut!
  }
  ...
}
</code></pre>
<br />

First we can try to checkout an asset.  In our GraphQL Playground, we can send the following mutation. Notice the email address is not properly formated. The
mutation will fail and we will receive an error stating why.

<pre><code class="language-graphql">
mutation {
  checkoutAsset(assetUpc: "9000000002", userEmail: "crosewell4_freewebs.com") {
    assetUpc
    userEmail
    checkoutDate
    checkinDate
  }
}
</code></pre>
<br />

Next we'll try a query and we should get the same error.
<pre><code class="language-graphql">
{
  checkouts(userEmail: "crosewell4_freewebs.com" ) {
    id
    assetUpc
    patron {
      firstName
      lastName
    }
  }
}
</code></pre>
<br />

To test that we're cleaning any currently bad data, we can add some bad data to our MongoDB with the following MongoDB query. Somehow the user was able to send
an HTML script tag as their email. If this wasn't cleaned before being sent to the client and the client wasn't handling it, this could cause big problems for
our users.

<pre><code class="language-javascript">
db.getCollection('patrons').insertOne({
    "_id" : ObjectId("5c363522a8f5e16c5c41cac5"),
    "year_registered" : 2009.0,
    "first_name" : "Bad",
    "last_name" : "User",
    "email" : "&lt;script&gt;alert('hello');&lt;/script&gt;",
    "phone_cell" : "123-456-7890"
})
</code></pre>
<br />

We'll also need to apply our new directive to any appropriate email field and make it a nullable field.

<pre><code class="language-graphql">
# File: src/schema/patron/patron.typeDef.js
const typeDef = /* GraphQL */`
  extend type Query {
    patron(email: String @email, id: ID): Patron
    patrons(yearRegistered: Int, limit: Int): [Patron]!
  }
  
  type Patron {
    id: ID!
    yearRegistered: Int!
    firstName: String!
    lastName: String!
    email: String <mark>@email</mark>
    phoneCell: String!
  }
  ...
}
</code></pre>
<br />

If we now try to query information for this user by id, we'll still receive the valid data, but the email will be null and an error will explain why.

<pre><code class="language-graphql">
{
  patron (id: "5c363522a8f5e16c5c41cac5") {
    firstName
    lastName
    email
  }
}

### Results
{
  "errors": [
    {
      "message": "Email address failed validation",
      "locations": [
        {
          "line": 5,
          "column": 5
        }
      ],
      "path": [
        "patron",
        "email"
      ],
      "extensions": {
        "code": "INVALID_EMAIL",
      }
    }
  ],
  "data": {
    "patron": {
      "firstName": "Bad",
      "lastName": "User",
      "email": null
    }
  }
}
</code></pre>

## Conclusion

Directives are a great way to abstract and extend functionality on your GraphQL server. Applying directives to field definitions is just one of many
possibilities. Another great use case is input validation for query variables. The graphql-tools documentation site has a list of other
[examples](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphql-tools/schema-directives.html#Examples) that you may want to check out.
